Aborɔfo wɔ asɛm bi a wɔtaa ka. Wɔse “be good to the people you meet on your way up, because you’ll meet them on your way down”. Borɔfo huhuuhu yi nyinaa asekyerɛ ne sɛ “sɛ Onyankopɔn yɛ wo adom na ɔrepagya wo a, hwɛ sɛ wobɛyɛ afoforɔ papa ɛsiane sɛ wɔn ara na worehwe fam a, wobɛhyia wɔn”. Nanso Akosua Kumi deɛ, wampɛ saa afotuo yi antie koraa.

Whites (white people) have something that they usually say. They say “be nice to the people you meet on your way up, because you’ll meet them on your way down”. What all this scary English mean is that “if God shows you grace and begins to lift you up, be sure to do good to others because they are the same people you’ll meet when you are falling down”. But for Akosua Kumi, she did not pay heed to this advice at all.

Akosua Kumi sii soɔ no, na ahoɔfɛ deɛ ɔfa no kwa. Sɛ ɔsɔre anɔpa dware tutu aduhwam gu ne ho, na ɔde nnɛmmafoɔ “lepeseteke” yi bi keka n’ano a, gyae! Ahoɔfɛ ni! Akosua tumi de n’ani kɛkɛ hwɛ mmarima ma wɔtete hwe mmɔnka mu. Yei nti na mmarima ho nyɛ ne na koraa. Mmarima atitire-atitire, animuonyamfoɔ apapa bi na na wɔse Akosua pɛ.

Akosua Kumi sii soɔ no, na ahoɔfɛ deɛ ɔfa no kwa. Sɛ ɔsɔre anɔpa dware tutu aduhwam gu ne ho, na ɔde nnɛmmafoɔ “lepeseteke” yi bi keka n’ano a, gyae! Ahoɔfɛ ni! Akosua tumi de n’ani kɛkɛ hwɛ mmarima ma wɔtete hwe mmɔnka mu. Yei nti na mmarima ho nyɛ ne na koraa. Mmarima atitire-atitire, animuonyamfoɔ apapa bi na na wɔse Akosua pɛ.

When Akosua Kumi was in her prime, beauty was nothing to her. If she wakes up in the morning, baths, sprays perfume on herself and apply the modern-day people’s lipstick on her lips, stop! What a beauty! Akosua could look at men with just her eyes and cause them to fall into ditches. Because of this, men weren’t scarce (a scarce commodity) for her at all. Very important, most-honourable men were those who used to propose to Akosua.

Mmarima pii na wɔbɛsee Akosua Kumi pɛ, nanso wampɛ mu biara kɔpem sɛ ɔhyiaa Amakye. Akosua na watɔ ɔdɔ ntentan mu yi. Wamma Amakye ano ansi mpo na ɔteaa mu sɛ “aane!”. Akosua ne Amakye firii aseɛ twee mpena a na ɛmu yɛ den yie.

A lot of men came to propose to Akosua Kumi, but she did not like any of them until she met Amakye. And there fell Akosua into the love web. She did no wait for Amakye to even finish his proposal and she shouted “yes!”. Akosua and Amakye started a very serious relationship.

Ahyɛaseɛ no, na biribiara deda n’akwan mu. Amakye wɔ sika, na ne ho nso yɛ fɛ; Akosua nni sika deɛ, nanso ɛba no ahoɔfɛ a, sɛ wonim dada. Amakye kɔgyee fie wɔ Mamprobi maa Akosua. Afei nso, ɔbuee sotɔɔ kɛseɛ wɔ kurom maa no. Anso hɔ. Amakye san tɔɔ kaa fɛfɛɛfɛ bi maa ne dɔ wiase. Wɔka sɛ “ɔdɔ nan kyiri abosea” a, wɔmmoa koraa.

At the beginning, everything was in order. Amakye has money, and he’s handsome, too; it’s the case that Akosua does not have money, but when it comes to beauty, I’m sure you know already. Amakye went for a house in Mamprobi for Akosua. Again, he opened a big store in town for her. It did not end there. Amakye also bought a very beautiful car for the love of his life. If they say “a beloved’s foot loathes gravels”, they don’t lie at all.

Mpanimfoɔ aka ato hɔ sɛ “suban wɔ hɔ yi, ɛte sɛ nyinsɛn; wode sie a, ɛnyɛ yie”. Akosua ahu sika. Afei ɔhyɛɛ aseɛ daa ne suban ankasa adi. Akosua mmu nipa bibire biara. Mpanimfoɔ mpo ɔmmu wɔn na ne mfɛfoɔ. Wokɔka nso a, ɔbɛdi wo atɛm sei pɔtɔɔ.

It’s been said by elders that “character as you see it, it’s like pregnancy; it is impossible to hide”. Akosua has seen money. Now she began to reveal her true character. Akosua does not respect any living being (human). She does not even respect elders, how much so her peers. If you talk about it, too, she will insult you so badly.

Na yei na da koro bi Akosua Kumi kɔɔ dwam sɛ ɔrekɔdi dwa abɛnoa aduane ama Amakye, n’akoma mu tɔfe baako pɛ. Na osuobrane bi atɔ saa anɔpa no ama dwam hɔ nyinaa ayiyi atɛkyɛ. Na maame panin bi di Akosua anim a ɔreyiyi ne nan mmaako mmaako sɛdeɛ ɛbɛyɛ a atɛkyɛ no nsɛe ne ho. Ntɛm a Akosua repɛ nti no, ɔyɛɛ sɛ ɔresan maame yi ho akɔ. Ɔpiaa maame no hwee atɛkyɛ no mu sei pram! Maame no kaa sɛ “O me ba, adɛn na woapia me ahwe fam saa?” Akosua anhwɛ ammoa maame yi mpo. Ɔdidii n’atɛm guu so. Ɔkaa sɛ “Bayifoɔ! Kɔka kyerɛ nea ɔsomaa wo no sɛ woanhu me”. Ɔwieeɛ no, ɔgyaa maame yi fam hɔ twaa mu kɔdii ne dwa. Ɛyɛɛ obiara nwanwa.

It was through this that one day Akosua Kumi went to the market to buy stuff to cook food for Amakye, her one and only sweetheart. There had been a downpour that morning which had caused the market to become muddy. There was a certain woman ahead of Akosua who was watching her steps to avoid the mud soiling herself. Because Akosua was in a hurry, she decided to walk past the woman. She pushed the woman right into the mud. The woman said “Oh my daughter, why have you pushed me onto the ground like that?” Akosua did not even look to help the woman. She insulted her on top. She said “Witch! Go and tell whoever sent you that you did not see me”. When she finished, she left the woman on the floor and went ahead to buy her things. It surprised everyone.

Bɛyɛ bosome mmiɛnsa akyi no, Amakye de too Akosua Kumi anim sɛ ɔpɛ sɛ ɔware no. Akanfoɔ taa ka sɛ “ɔbaa deɛ, w’animuonyam ne awareɛ”. Anigyeɛ mmorosoɔ bɛhyɛɛ Akosua akoma mu. Saa bosome no deɛ, ɛdwom baako pɛ na na Akosua toɔ: “Adeɛ a m’ani nna so na me nsa aka”.

After about three months, Amakye laid before Akosua Kumi that he’d like to marry her. The Akan people usually say “for a woman, your honour is your marriage”. Ecstasy filled Akosua’s heart. For that month, it was only one song that Akosua was singing: “Adeɛ a m’ani nna so na me nsa aka (it is what I don’t expect that I have received)”.

Wɔfirii aseɛ boaa wɔn ho de nhyehyɛeɛ totoo akwan mu sɛdeɛ ɛbɛyɛ a awareɛ no bɛkɔ tɔɔtee. Akosua de Amakye kɔɔ ne fie kɔkyeaa n’abusuafoɔ maa wɔgyee no too mu prɛko pɛ. Amakye nso de Akosua kɔɔ fie kɔkyeaa n’abusuafoɔ. Wɔn nyinaa ani gyee Akosua ho pa ara. Amakye nuabaa, Kyeiwaa, a na wɔtaa ka sɛ biribiara nyɛ no fɛ mpo gye too mu sɛ “ampa, me nua yi nim dwam! Ahoɔfɛ nie!”.

They began to prepare themselves and laid down arrangements in order for the marriage to go on perfectly without setbacks. Akosua took Amakye to her home to greet her family and they accepted him instantly. Amakye also took Akosua to his home to greet his family. They were all happy about Akosua (they all liked her very much). Amakye’s sister, Kyeiwaa, whom they usually tagged as not appreciating the beauty of anything even admitted that “truly, this my brother knows the market! This is beauty!”

Yei nyinaa rekɔ so no, na Amakye maame nni fie. Amakye nso deɛ, na ɔnsi ne maame fam koraa. Ɔpapa kaa baabi ansa yɛwoo no nti, ne nkwanna nyinaa no, ɔmaame na na wahwɛ no ama wabɛyɛ sɛdeɛ ɔteɛ no. Ne saa nti, na woka Amakye maame a, woaka Amakye. Nti na ɛmfa ho sɛ adeɛ resa; sɛ Amakye maame mmaeɛ a, wɔnkɔeɛ. Wɔtwɛnn no ara kɔpem sɛ Maame Amoakoaa baeɛ.

As all this was going on, Amakye’s mum was not home. And for Amakye, he did not joke with his mum at all. His dad died before he was born so, throughout his lifetime, it was his mum who had taken care of him to become who he was. Due to this, it was the case that if you touched Amakye’s mum, you had touched Amakye. So it did not matter that it was getting late; if Amakye’s mum hasn’t come, they haven’t left (they will leave only after Amakye’s mum returns). They waited until Maame Amoakoaa came.

Na Akosua nsɔre nkɔyɛ n’ase atuu a, maame korɔ yi a ɔsumm no hwee fam wɔ dwam nnaano no anim ni. “Amakye, ɔbaa no a wopɛ sɛ woware no no ni?” Maame Amoakoaa bisaa ne ba. Amakye yii ano sɛ “Aane, maame. Akosua Kumi a mabɔ ne din abɔ abɔ abɔ no, ɔno ni”.

Akosua should rise up to embrace (welcome) her in-law and there was the face of the very woman she had pushed onto the ground at the market the other day. “Amakye, is this the woman you want to marry?” Maame Amoakoaa asked her son. Amakye answered that “Yes, mum. This is the Akosua Kumi whose name I’ve been mentioning over and over again”.

Maame Amoakoaa twee Amakye kɔɔ ne dan mu. Amakye pueeɛ no, na n’anim asesa. Ɔde abufuo pue tuu ne kaa kɔeɛ a wanhwɛ Akosua anim mpo. Akosua yɛɛ brɛbrɛ bɛduruu fie no, na krado kɛseɛ bi da ne pono ano a ɛnyɛ asɛm ketewa. Efie o, sotɔɔ o, kaa o, Amakye agye no nyinaa.

Maame Amoakoaa pulled Amakye to her room. When Amakye came out, his demeanour had changed. He stormed out in anger and drove off in his car without even looking at Akosua’s face. When Akosua eventually got back home, her door had been locked with a huge padlock that it wasn’t to be taken as a light issue. Be it the house, the store, or the car, Amakye had taken all of them back.

Amakye akyi no, Akosua maa suban korɔ yi ara dii n’anim saa ara. Ɛnnɛ, Akosua Kumi tɔn bidie wɔ Kantamanto dwam; edwa korɔ no a ɔsumm Amakye maame wɔ mu no. Sɛ bosome so na Maame Amoakoaa kɔ sɛ ɔrekɔdi dwa a, ɔhu no. Akosua anu ne ho, nanso aka akyi koraa; Amakye aware ɔbaa foforɔ.

After Amakye, Akosua let this same character lead her all through. Today, Akosua Kumi sells charcoal at the Kantamanto market; the same market in which she pushed Amakye mum. When the month ends and Maame Amoakoaa goes to buy her things, she sees her. Akosua has regretted, but it’s too late; Amakye has married another woman.

Daadaa nyinaa afotuo a ɛda Akosua Kumi ano ne sɛ “fa obuo ma obi biara a wobɛhyia no, na obiara nnim kyena”.

Day in, day out, the advice that’s on the lips of Akosua Kumi is that “accord everyone you meet respect, for nobody knows tomorrow”.
